docs/content/docs/contributing.md, before:

# Contributing to cem

Thank you for your interest in contributing to `cem`! This guide will help you set up your environment for development, building, and testing. Please read carefully and reach out if you have questions.

## Getting Started

- Fork and clone the repo:  
  ```sh
  git clone https://github.com/bennypowers/cem.git
  cd cem
  ```
- Install [Go](https://golang.org/doc/install) (version 1.24 or newer recommended).
- Install [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/) (version 22 recommended) and [npm](https://www.npmjs.com/).

## Building

### Native Build (Linux/macOS)

To build the project for your local architecture:
```sh
make build
```
The binary will be output to `dist/cem`.

### Local Windows Build Using Podman

You can cross-compile Windows binaries from any OS using Podman (or Docker). This will output `cem-windows-x64.exe` and `cem-windows-arm64.exe` in your project root.

1. [Install Podman](https://podman.io/docs/installation) for your platform.
2. Run:
   ```sh
   make windows
   ```
   This will build both Windows x64 and arm64 executables using the parameterized Containerfile.

**Tip:**  
You can build a specific Windows architecture:
- x64: `make windows-x64`
- arm64: `make windows-arm64`

> Note: These builds are cross-compiled and cannot be run directly on macOS or Linux. Test on a Windows machine or VM if needed.

## Testing

Run Go tests:
```sh
make test
```

## Continuous Integration (CI)

- All PRs are built and tested via GitHub Actions.
- The CI will cross-compile for Linux, macOS, and Windows (x64 and arm64), package npm binaries for each platform, and check that npm packaging works.
- You can see the exact build matrices in `.github/workflows/release.yml` and `.github/workflows/test-build.yml`.

## NPM Packaging

The project produces platform-specific npm packages. Platform detection and binary installation are managed by scripts in the `npm` directory. You can test npm packaging locally with:
```sh
node scripts/gen-platform-package-jsons.js
```
and validate the package with:
```sh
cd platforms/cem-<platform>-<arch>
npm pack --dry-run
```

## Multi-Platform Publishing for cem

cem uses an esbuild-style optionalDependencies strategy for platform binaries.

## Releasing

1. Tag your release (e.g., `v1.2.3`) in the main branch.
2. The CI workflow will:
   - Cross-compile and publish each `@pwrs/cem-PLATFORM-ARCH` package with the correct binary.
   - Publish the main `@pwrs/cem` package with all subpackages as `optionalDependencies`.

## Local Testing

- Use `npm install --ignore-scripts` to test installation.
- The wrapper (`bin/cem.js`) will find and invoke the platform-specific binary.

## Requirements

- Node.js 22+ is required for all packages.
- All packages are ESM-only (`"type": "module"`).

## Adding a New Platform

- Add a new entry in `scripts/gen-platform-package-jsons.mjs` and build logic.
- Update the main package's `optionalDependencies`.

## How It Works

- The main package (`@pwrs/cem`) does not ship a binary.
- On install, npm will only pull in the appropriate platform package.
- The wrapper script detects your platform and runs the correct binary.

## Code Formatting & Linting

- Go:  
  ```sh
  make format
  make lint
  ```

## Submitting Changes

- Open a pull request from your fork.
- Ensure all CI checks pass.
- Provide a clear description of your changes.

---
title: Contributing
description: How to contribute to cem cli
weight: 50
---

Thank you for contributing!

Commit message:

docs: various improvements
docs:nicer benchmark script

docs: ci build

docs: css

docs: build

docs: update build

docs: fix readme links

docs: yaml config

docs: go-import meta

docs: hugo urls

docs: relative links

docs: main page

docs: deal with redirects

docs: fix links

docs: say shma and chuck it over the wall

docs: fix local

docs: more wall chucking

docs: top nav

docs: top nav

docs: logo

chore: nvm version

docs/content/docs/contributing.md, after:

---
title: Contributing
description: How to contribute to cem cli
weight: 50
---
# Contributing to cem

Thank you for your interest in contributing to `cem`! This guide will help you set up your environment for development, building, and testing. Please read carefully and reach out if you have questions.

## Getting Started

- Fork and clone the repo:  
  ```sh
  git clone https://github.com/bennypowers/cem.git
  cd cem
  ```
- Install [Go](https://golang.org/doc/install) (version 1.24 or newer recommended).
- Install [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/) (version 22 recommended) and [npm](https://www.npmjs.com/).

## Building

### Native Build (Linux/macOS)

To build the project for your local architecture:
```sh
make build
```
The binary will be output to `dist/cem`.

### Local Windows Build Using Podman

You can cross-compile Windows binaries from any OS using Podman (or Docker). This will output `cem-windows-x64.exe` and `cem-windows-arm64.exe` in your project root.

1. [Install Podman](https://podman.io/docs/installation) for your platform.
2. Run:
   ```sh
   make windows
   ```
   This will build both Windows x64 and arm64 executables using the parameterized Containerfile.

**Tip:**  
You can build a specific Windows architecture:
- x64: `make windows-x64`
- arm64: `make windows-arm64`

> Note: These builds are cross-compiled and cannot be run directly on macOS or Linux. Test on a Windows machine or VM if needed.

## Workspace Package

The `workspace` package provides a consistent interface for working with local and remote packages. It abstracts away the details of whether files are on the local filesystem or need to be fetched from a remote source like the npm registry. This allows the `list` command to work with both local and remote packages seamlessly.

## Testing

This project includes both unit tests and end-to-end (E2E) tests.

- Run unit tests: `make test-unit`
- Run E2E tests: `make test-e2e`
- Run all tests: `make test`

### Code Coverage

To view the test coverage report, run:

```sh
make show-coverage
```

This will open an HTML report in your browser.

## Continuous Integration (CI)

- All PRs are built and tested via GitHub Actions.
- The CI will cross-compile for Linux, macOS, and Windows (x64 and arm64), package npm binaries for each platform, and check that npm packaging works.
- You can see the exact build matrices in `.github/workflows/release.yml` and `.github/workflows/test-build.yml`.

## NPM Packaging

The project produces platform-specific npm packages. Platform detection and binary installation are managed by scripts in the `npm` directory. You can test npm packaging locally with:
```sh
node scripts/gen-platform-package-jsons.js
```
and validate the package with:
```sh
cd platforms/cem-<platform>-<arch>
npm pack --dry-run
```

## Multi-Platform Publishing for cem

cem uses an esbuild-style optionalDependencies strategy for platform binaries.

## Releasing

1. Tag your release (e.g., `v1.2.3`) in the main branch.
2. The CI workflow will:
   - Cross-compile and publish each `@pwrs/cem-PLATFORM-ARCH` package with the correct binary.
   - Publish the main `@pwrs/cem` package with all subpackages as `optionalDependencies`.

## Local Testing

- Use `npm install --ignore-scripts` to test installation.
- The wrapper (`bin/cem.js`) will find and invoke the platform-specific binary.

## Requirements

- Node.js 22+ is required for all packages.
- All packages are ESM-only (`"type": "module"`).

## Adding a New Platform

- Add a new entry in `scripts/gen-platform-package-jsons.mjs` and build logic.
- Update the main package's `optionalDependencies`.

## How It Works

- The main package (`@pwrs/cem`) does not ship a binary.
- On install, npm will only pull in the appropriate platform package.
- The wrapper script detects your platform and runs the correct binary.

## Code Formatting & Linting

- Go:  
  ```sh
  make format
  make lint
  ```

## Submitting Changes

- Open a pull request from your fork.
- Ensure all CI checks pass.
- Provide a clear description of your changes.

---

Thank you for contributing!
